piliko
======

Piliko is a very, very, very rough implementation of some formulas from 
Rational Trigonmetry in a computer language. 

Current status
==============

This code is 'alpha' level. It is highly experimental. It can do basic 
calculations, but the whole type system has not been thought out very 
carefully and many functions are partially or wholly unimplemented. 
Tests have not been created.

Disclaimer 
==========

Rational Trigonometry was discovered and developed by Norman J 
Wildberger. He is not affiliated with this package and the use of his 
terms like Rational Trigonometry, quadrance, spread, etc, doesn't imply 
that he endorses this package.

* https://www.youtube.com/user/njwildberger
* http://web.maths.unsw.edu.au/~norman/
* http://www.wildegg.com
* http://www.cut-the-knot.org/pythagoras/RationalTrig/CutTheKnot.shtml
* http://farside.ph.utexas.edu/euclid.html

The computer language used is Python.


But I don't know the computer language Python
=============================================

You don't need to know Python to do basic calculations. The syntax is
designed to be somewhat simple. Please see the examples. As long as you can
start up a python interpreter on your machine, you should be OK. See
http://www.python.org to download a python interpreter for your computer. 
Once you can get to the screen where you type 
	
	print 'hello world'

and get a 'hello world' to appear, then you will almost be ready to use 
piliko. The next step is to put the 'piliko.py' file in a folder where 
your python interpreter can find it. Then you can load piliko with this 
command in python:

	from piliko import *

Examples
========

Example 1:

	from piliko import *

	p1 = point(0,0)
	p2 = point(3,0)
	p3 = point(0,4)
	print p1,p2,p3

	L1 = line( p1, p2 )
	L2 = line( p1, p3 )
	s = spread( L1, L2 )
	print s

Result:

	[0,0] [3,0] [0,4]
	1

Example 2:

	from piliko import *

	v1 = vector(3,0)
	v2 = vector(0,4)
	print v1, v2

	q1 = quadrance( v1 )
	q2 = quadrance( v2 )
	print q1, q2

	s = spread( v1, v2 )
	print s

Result:

	(3,0) (0,4)
	9 16
	1

Example 3:

	p1,p2,p3,p4 = point(0,0),point(3,0),point(2,0),point(6,0)
	print is_harmonic_range( p1, p2, p3, p4 )

Result:

	True

Example 4:

	p=point(3,4)
	bq,rq,gq=blue_quadrance(p),red_quadrance(p),green_quadrance(p)
	print p,' ',bq,rq,gq,' ',sqr(bq),sqr(rq),sqr(gq)

Result:

	[3,4]   25 -7 24   625 49 576

More examples can be found in test.py. To run it:

	python test.py

Basic principle
===============

The Rational numbers, unlike finite floating point numbers, are closed 
under addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. This makes 
them uniquely suited to geometry, as many geometry packages have proven 
(including CGAL and LEDA). Why? Because many of the basic geometry 
operations, including scale, translate, boolean, intersection, etc, are 
doable in algebra using only plus, minus, multiply, and divide.

Therefore no approximation is required to perform these basic 
operations, which means the issue of floating-point error disappears.

In fact it is possible to develop a geometry that does not use 
transcendental functions at all. There are rational analogues for 
rotation. Any conic curve can be approximated very well by rational 
parameterization (rational points on the curve). Bezier curves can be 
approximated by rational points. And thus, truetype fonts. Also a large 
number of polynomial curves can be parameterized by rational points. 
There are even people working algorithms to create rational 
paramterizations automatically.

The term 'approximate' here means that the curves that are usually 
approximated with floating point approximations of transcendental 
functions, are instead approximated by drawing line segments between 
rational coordinates. For example drawing lines between the rational 
points of the unit circle will result in a polygon approximation of the 
circle. Comparing this to the approximation of the circle generated by 
floating point functions like cosine and sine, you will eventually 
realize that the floating point circle approximations are also polygons, 
because when you have to finally output the circle to some format, like 
a pixellated screen, or an STL or DXF file, you are going to output 
distinct points that represent points on the circle. In the end, there 
is no 'exact' circle in a computer, so you are just choosing between 
methods of approximation. Rational approximation is just another 
approximation method. However it has some advantages in that, as 
described, it is closed under division, so you can scale objects without 
loss of information. And rational points on a circle have an exact distance
from the center, not an approximate distance. 

It may be even possible to create anlogues of geometry algorithms (like 
catmull clark subdivision) using rational points and rational functions.

The downside is that you lose some old things, like the notion of 
distance in any situation (for example, the point 1,1 is sqrt(2) from 
the origin... a rational circle will not include any such point at 45 
degrees), or the intersection of any line with any circle (this is 
replaced by the notion of the intersection of a line with the polygon 
approximation of the circle). Even the length of the side of a 45-45-90 
or 30-60-90 triangle is lost.

Another huge loss is that you can't add two angles together with simple 
addition. You have to use 'spread polynomials' which are immensly 
complicated compared to addition.

The other downside is it's slow. Computers were optimized for floating 
point for 50 years. Hardware doesnt generally deal with rationals. You 
also have to worry about overflowing your integers. Typically rational 
number software uses 'big int', which can expand the integer past the 
size native to the machine. For example on a 32-bit computer 'big int' 
allows the use of integers larger than the maximum expressable in 32 
bits, which is around ~4 billion. This makes it slow though.

Lastly, any algorithm that re-uses a lot of numbers can generate 
massively long integers, basically 'overflow' of the ordinary 64-bit 
integer, creating lots of RAM usage and very slow arithmetic operations. 
For example, simulating a space ship with force=g*mass1*mass2/radius^2 
can create huge integers very quickly.

Copyright License
=================

This code is free for use under a basic BSD-style Open Source Software 
license as described in the LICENSE file. You can freely copy and use it
per the terms in that LICENSE file.
